**Self-contained subqueries**

Self-contained subqueries are subqueries that have no dependency on the outer query.
If you want, you can highlight the inner query in SSMS and run it independently.

A subquery can return different forms of results. It can return a single value,
table with multiple values in a single column, or even a multi-column table result.

Syntax:

```T-SQL
SELECT …
WHERE expression operator
    (SELECT …);
```

* * *

**Self-contained subqueries – scalar subqueries**

Subqueries <u>that return a single value</u>, or scalar subqueries, can be used where a single-valued expression is expected, like in one side of a comparison.

Note that if what’s supposed to be a scalar subquery returns in practice more than one value, the code fails at run time.
If the scalar subquery returns an empty set, it is converted to a NULL.

A subquery can also return multiple values in the form of a single column and multiple rows.
Such a subquery can be used where a multi-valued result is expected, for example, when using the IN predicate.

* * *

T-SQL supports a few esoteric predicates that operate on subqueries. Those are ALL, ANY and SOME.
They are rarely used because there are usually simpler and more intuitive alternatives.

The ALL predicate returns true only if when applying the operator to the input expression and all values returned by the subquery, you get a true in all cases.

The ANY and SOME predicates have identical meaning. Suffice that you get a true for at least one of the values returned by the subquery for the whole predicate to return true.

* * *

**Corelated Subqueries**

Correlated subqueries are subqueries where the inner query has a reference to a column from the table in the outer query.

The EXISTS predicate accepts a subquery as input and returns true when the subquery returns at least one row and false otherwise.

As a predicate, EXISTS doesn’t need to return the result set of the subquery; rather, it returns only true or false, depending on whether the subquery returns any rows. For this reason, the query optimizer ignores the SELECT list of the subquery, and therefore, whatever you specify there will not affect optimization choices like index selection.

