## Concatenation

T-SQL supports two ways to concatenate string - one with the plus (+) operator another with the CONCAT function.

When any of the inputs is NULL, the + operator returns NULL.
That’s standard behavior that can be changed by turning off a session option called CONCAT\_NULL\_YIELDS\_NULL\_INPUT.

If you want to substitute a NULL with an empty string, there are a number of ways for you to do this programmatically.

One option is to use

```T-SQL
COALESCE(expression, '')
```

If expression is NULL the result is empty string.

Another option is to use the CONCAT function which, unlike the + operator, substitutes a NULL input with an empty string.

* * *

## Substring extraction and position

**SUBSTRING**
```T-SQL
SUBSTRING(expression, start, length) 
```

```T-SQL
SUBSTRING('abcdef', 2, 3) -- returns bcd
```

With the SUBSTRING function, you can extract a substring from a string given as the first argument, starting with the position given as the second argument, and a length given as the third agrument.

**LEFT, RIGHT**

```T-SQL
LEFT(character_expression, integer_expression)
RIGHT(character_expression, integer_expression)
```

```T-SQL
LEFT('abcdefg', 2) -- returns ab
RIGHT('abcdefg', 2) -- returns fg
```

LEFT and RIGHT functions extract a requested number of characters from the left and right ends of the input string, respectively.

**CHARINDEX**

```T-SQL
CHARINDEX(expressionToFind, expressionToSearch, start_location)
```

```T-SQL
CHARINDEX('is', 'This is a string') -- returns 3
CHARINDEX('is', 'This is a string', 4) -- returns 6
```

Returns the position of the first occurrence of the string provided as the first argument within the string provided as the second argument.

Note that you can provide a third argument indicating to the function where to start looking.

**PATINDEX**

```T-SQL
PATINDEX ('%pattern%', expression)
```

```T-SQL
PATINDEX('%ter%', 'interesting data') -- returns 3
```

Like CHARINDEX, locates the first position of a string within another string.
But whereas with CHARINDEX you’re looking for a constant string, with PATINDEX you’re looking for a pattern.

**LEN**

```T-SQL
LEN(string_expression)
```

```T-SQL
LEN('12345') -- returns 5
```

Returns the length of an input string in terms of the number of characters (not bytes), whether the input is a regular character or Unicode character string.

If there are any trailing spaces, LEN removes them (LEN doesn’t remove leading spaces!).

**DATALENGTH**
Returns the length of the input in terms of number of bytes.

**REPLACE**

```T-SQL
REPLACE(string_expression, string_pattern, string_replacement)
```

```T-SQL
REPLACE('abcdef','cde','xxx') -- returns 'abxxxf'
```

You can replace in an input string provided as the first argument all occurrences of the string provided as the second argument, with the string provided as the third argument.

**REPLICATE**

```T-SQL
REPLICATE(string_expression, integer_expression) 
```

```T-SQL
REPLICATE('10a', 4) -- returns '10a10a10a10a'
```

Allows you to replicate an input string a requested number of times.

**STUFF**
1. Operates on an input string provided as the first argument
2. Then from the character position indicated as the second argument
3. Deletes the number of characters indicated by the third argument
4. Then it inserts in that position the string specified as the fourth argument.

```T-SQL
STUFF(character_expression, start, length, replace_with_expression)
```

```T-SQL
SELECT STUFF('0x0y0z', 3, 1, '9') -- returns '0x9y0z'
```

**UPPER, LOWER, LTRIM, RTRIM**

are self-explanatory

Note that there’s no TRIM function that removes both leading and trailing spaces.

**FORMAT**

```T-SQL
FORMAT(value, format, culture)
```

```T-SQL
FORMAT(GETDATE(), 'dd/MM/yyyy', 'en-US') AS 'Date' -- returns 02/02/2023
FORMAT(123456789,'###-##-####') AS 'Custom Number' -- returns 123-45-6789
```

You can format an input value based on a format string, and optionally specify the culture as a third input where relevant.

**STRING_SPLIT**

```T-SQL
STRING_SPLIT(string, separator, enable_ordinal)
```

```T-SQL
STRING_SPLIT('Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet.', ' ')
```

Accepts a character string with a separated list of values provided as the first input, and a character string with the separator as the second input and returns a result set with the column called value holding the individual split strings.
