T-SQL supports an expression called CASE and a number of related functions that you can use to apply conditional logic to determine the returned value.

Many people incorrectly refer to CASE as a statement. A statement performs some kind of an action or controls the flow of the code, and that’s not what CASE does; CASE returns a value, and hence is an expression.

CASE expression has two forms – the simple and the searched

```T-SQL
SELECT [ProductNumber], [Category] =  
    CASE ProductLine  
        WHEN 'R' THEN 'Road'  
        WHEN 'M' THEN 'Mountain'  
        WHEN 'T' THEN 'Touring'  
        WHEN 'S' THEN 'Other sale items'  
        ELSE 'Not for sale'  
    END,
    [Name], [ProductLine]
FROM Production.Product
```

The searched form of the CASE expression is more flexible. 
Instead of comparing an input expression to multiple possible expressions, it uses predicates in the WHEN clauses, and the first predicate that evaluates to true determines which when expression is returned.

```T-SQL
SELECT [ProductNumber], [Name], [Price Range] =
    CASE
        WHEN ListPrice =  0 THEN 'Mfg item - not for resale'
        WHEN ListPrice < 50 THEN 'Under $50'
        WHEN ListPrice >= 50 and ListPrice < 250 THEN 'Under $250'
        WHEN ListPrice >= 250 and ListPrice < 1000 THEN 'Under $1000'
        ELSE 'Over $1000'  
    END,
    [ListPrice]
FROM Production.Product
```


T-SQL supports a number of functions that can be considered as abbreviates of the CASE expression.
Those are the standard COALESCE and NULLIF functions and nonstandard ISNULL, IIF and CHOOSE.

**COALESCE**
accepts a list of expressions as input and returns the first that is not NULL, or NULL if all are NULLs. 

**ISNULL**
nonstandard ISNULL is similar to the standard COALESCE, but it’s a bit more limited in the sense that it supports only two inputs.
Like COALESCE, it returns the first input that is not NULL.

ISNULL is actually more limited than COALESCE, so generally, it is recommended to stick to COALESCE.

**NULLIF**

Standard NULLIF function accepts two input expressions, returns NULL if they are equal, and returns the first input if they are not. 
```T-SQL
NULLIF(col1, col2)
```
If col1 is equal to col2, the function returns a NULL; otherwise, it returns the col1 value.

**IIF and CHOOSE**

These are nonstandard T-SQL functions that were added to simplify migrations from Microsoft Access platforms. 

Because these functions aren’t standard and there are simple standard alternatives with CASE expressions, it is not usually recommended that you use them. 

With the IIF function, you can return one value if an input predicate is true and another value otherwise. The function has the following form.

```T-SQL
-- These funcitons are equivalent:
IIF(<predicate>, <true_result>, <false_or_unknown_result>)

CASE 
	WHEN <predicate> THEN <true_result> 
	ELSE <false_or_unknown_result> 
END
```

**CHOOSE**
The CHOOSE function allows you to provide a position and a list of expressions, and returns the expression in the indicated position.

```T-SQL
CHOOSE(256, exp1, exp2, …, exp1024)
-- returns exp256
```

