System functions return information about various aspects of the system.

**@@ROWCOUNT and ROWCOUNT_BIG()**

The @@ROWCOUNT function returns the number of rows affected by last statement that you executed.

The @@ROWCOUNT function returns an INT type value.
If the row count can exceed the maximum INT value (2,147,483,647) use the ROWCOUNT_BIG() function, which returns a BIGINT typed value.

* * *

**Compression functions**

The function COMPRESS enables you to compress an input character or binary string using GZIP algorithm into a result binary string.

When you later query the table you use DECOMPRESS function to decompress the column value. However, because the result is a binary string, you need to convert it to the target type.

* * *

**Context info and session context**

If you want to pass something to a procedure, you use an input parameter and if you want to return something back, you use an output parameter.

However, certain modules in T-SQL, for example triggers, are by design niladic, meaning they don’t suport parameters. One technique to pass information between an outer level and a niladic module is to use either context info or session context.

**Context info** is a binary string of up to 128 bytes that is associated with your session.
You write to it using the SET CONTEXT\_INFO command and read it using CONTEXT\_INFO function.

```T-SQL
DECLARE @var VARBINARY(128);
SET @var = CAST('JAKUB' AS VARBINARY(128));
SET CONTEXT_INFO @var;
GO

DECLARE @fromContextInfo VARCHAR(128);
SET @fromContextInfo =
(SELECT context_info
FROM sys.dm_exec_sessions  
WHERE session_id = @@SPID)

SELECT @fromContextInfo;
GO
```

Using session context you store key-value pairs.
The key is a name of a sysname type (internally maped to NVARCHAR(128)), and the value is a SQL_VARIANT typed value that is assiociated with the key.

You can also mark the pair as read only, an then until the session resets, no one will be able to overwrite the value associated with thet key.

You create the key and set its associated value using the *sp\_set\_session_context* stored procedure and read it using the SESSION_CONTEXT function.

```T-SQL
EXEC sp_set_session_context @key = N'language', @value = 'us-English', @read_only = 1;

SELECT SESSION_CONTEXT(N'language')
```

* * *

**GUID**
If you need to generate a key that is globally unique, even across systems, you use the NEWID function to generate it as a UNIQUEIDENTIFIER typed value.

```T-SQL
SELECT NEWID() AS myGuid;
```

If you want the GUID to always increase within the machine, use the NEWSEQUENTIALID system function.
Note that you cannot invoke this function independently, rather only as an expression in a DEFAULT constraint that is associated with a column.

**Identity functions**

If you need a numeric key generator, you use either a sequence object or the identity column property.

Sequence object is an independent object in the database that you create using the CREATE SEQUENCE command. Once created, every time you need a new value, you invoke the function:
`NEXT VALUE FOR sequence_name`

Identity column property is a property of a column in a table.
SQL Server generates a new key only as part of an INSERT statement that you submit against the target table, where you ignore the column with the identity property.

After adding the row, you query the system function SCOPE_IDENTITY to get the last identity value that was generated in the same session and scope.
In the same scope I mean that if a trigger was fired and also added a row to a table with an identity property, this will not affect the value that the function will return (you don’t get the value!).
If you want to get the last identity value generated in your session, irrespective of scope, you query the system function @@IDENTITY.