T-SQL has logical and physical sides.

The physical side is the processing of the query by the database engine.
The logical side explains order of a query.

Physical processing must produce the result defined by logical query processing.

The physical query processing order:
1. FROM
2. WHERE
3. GROUP BY
4. HAVING
5. SELECT
6. ORDER BY

### FROM

The FROM clause has two main roles:
- It's the clause where you indicate the tables that you want to query.
- It's the clause where you can apply table operators like joins.

The result of this phase is a table (one indicated or the result of join) which is an input to next step.
It is considered the best practice to always explicitly indicate the schema name.
This practice can prevent you from ending up with a schema name that you did not intend to be used, and can also remove the cost involved in the implicit resolution process, although this cost is minor.

### WHERE

This phase filters rows based on the predicate.
Only rows for which the predicate evaluates to true are returned.
Rows which the predicate evaluates to an unknown state are not returned.
The result of this phase is provided as input to the next one.

### GROUP BY

This phase defines a group for each distinct combination of values in the grouped elements from the input table.
It then associates each input row to its respective group.

All expressions processed in subsequent phases must guarantee a single value per group.
If you want to refer to an element that is not part of your GROUP BY list, it must be contained within an aggregate function.

### HAVING

This phase is responsible for filtering data based on a predicate, but it is evaluated after the data has been grouped.
It is evaluated per group and filters groups as a whole.

### SELECT

This phase includes the following steps:
- Projects attributes from the input table as the returned attributes in the result of the query.
- Evaluates the expressions in the SELECT list and produces the result attributes. This includes assigning attributes with names if they are derived from expressions.
- If you indicate the DISTINCT clause, you remove duplicates.

Remember that T-SQL is based on multiset theory more than it is on set theory, and therefore, if duplicates are possible in the result, it's your responsibility to remove those with the DISTINCT clause.


### ORDER BY

This phase is responsible for returning the result in a specific presentation order according to the expressions that appear in the ORDER BY list.

The output of this phase isn't relational because it has a guaranteed order.
The result of this phase is what standard SQL calls cursor.

T-SQL also supports an object called a cursor that is defined based on a result of a query, and that allows fetching rows one at a time in a specified order.








