The predicate in WHERE clause needs to be of a form known as a search argument (SARG) or seek predicate to allow efficient use of the index.

A predicate in the form (column operator value or value operator column) can be a search argument.

Ex.
col1 = 10 or col1 > 10
are search arguments (SARG)

Applying manipulation to the filtered column in most cases prevents the predicate from being a search argument.

Ex.
Func(col) = 10

Ex.
column - 1 <= @var
is not SARG

To make it SARG it could be:
column <= @var + 1

In short, when predicate involves manipulation of the filtered column, and there are altrenative ways to phrase it whithout the manipulation, you can increase the likelihood for efficient use of indexing.

SQL Server internally supports a short-circuit concept, it is not neccessarily going to evaluate the expressions in left-to-right order.
It could decide, based on cost-related reasons, to start with the second expression, and then if the second expression evaluates to true, to evaluate the first expression as well.

This means that the query can fail due to unexpected errors.

### Filtering data

For filtering character data you can use the LIKE predicate.
The following wildcards can be used:

| Wildcard | Meaning | Example |
| --- | --- | --- |
| %   | Any string including an empty one | 'D%' |
| _   | A single character | '_D%' |
| \[&lt;char&gt;\] | A single character from a list | '\[AC\]%' |
| \[&lt;char&gt; - &lt;char&gt;\] | A single character from a range | '\[0-9\]%' |
| \[^&lt;char&gt; or &lt;char&gt; - &lt;char&gt;\] | A single character that is not in the list or range | '\[^0-9\]%' |

### Filtering Character Data

If you want values in a character field to be case sensitive, you create this field with appropriate **collation**.

Ex.
Polish texts will be case sensitive when you use
collate polish\_CS\_as

and will be not case sensitive when you use
collate polish\_CI\_as

You can also make column case sensitive in SELECT statement.

Ex.
SELECT * FROM table WHERE column collate polish\_CS\_as = 'example'

### Filtering Date and Time Data

There are two main approaches.

One is to use a form that is considered language-neutral.
The form '20070212' is always interpreted as ymd.

Another approach is to use the CONVERT or PARSE functions, which you can use to indicate how you want SQL Server to interpret the literal that you specify.
