**TOP STATEMENT**

With the TOP option, you can filter a requested number or percent of rows from the query result based on indicated ordering.
You specify the TIO iotuib ub the SELECT clause followed by the requested number of rows in parentheses (BIGINT data type).

You can also speficy a percent of rows to filter instead of a number.
To do so, specifty a FLOAT value in the range 0 through 100 in the parentheses, and the keyword PERCENT after the parentheses.

The TOP option allows you to specify a selfcontained expression.
From a practical perspective, this capability is especially important when you need to pass a parameter or a variable as input.

In most cases, you need your TOP option to rely on some ordering specification, but as it turns out, an ORDER BY clause isn't mandatory.
However, the query isn't deterministic.

Even when you do have an ORDER BY clause, in order for the query to be completely deterministic, the ordering must be unique.
You don't always care about guaranteeing deterministic or repeatable results, but if you do, two options are availabe.
One option is to ask to include all ties with the last row by adding the WITH TIES option.
The other option to guarantee determinism is to break the ties by adding a tiebreaker(column with unique values) that makes the ordering unique.

**OFFSET-FETCH**

The OFFSET and FETCH clauses appear right after the ORDER BY clause, and in fact, in T-SQL they require an ORDER BY clause to be present.
You first specify the OFFSET clause indicating how many rows you want to skip (0 if you don't want to skip any), then optionally specify the FETCH clause indicating how many rows you want to filter.

While in T-SQL, a FETCH clause requires an OFFSET clause, and the OFFSET clause doesn't require a FETCH clause.
By indicating an OFFSET clause, you're requesting to skip some rows then by not indicating a FETCH clause, you're requesting to return all remaining rows.

The OFFSET-FETCH option requires an ORDER BY clause.

With both the OFFSET and the FETCH clauses, you can use expressions as inputs.

```T-SQL
DECLARE @pagesize AS BIGINT = 25, @pagenum AS BIGINT = 2;

SELECT ProductID, [Name], StandardCost
FROM [Production].[Product]
ORDER BY StandardCost DESC, ProductID DESC
OFFSET ((@pagenum - 1) * @pagesize) ROWS FETCH NEXT @pagesize ROWS ONLY;
```

OFFSET-FETCH does not support options similar to TOP's PERCENT and WITH TIES.

From a performance standpoint, you should evaluate indexing the ORDER BY columns to support the TOP and OFFSET-FETCH options.
Such indexing serves a very similar purpose to indexing filtered columns and can help avoid scanning unnecessary data.