T-SQL supports these set operators:
**UNION**, **INTERSECT**, and **EXCEPT**.
It also supports one multiset operator: **UNION ALL**.

- The number of columns in the queries has to be the same and the column types of corresponding columns need to be compatible (implicityl convertible).
- Set operators consider two NULLs as equal for the purpose of comparision.
- Because the operators are set operators and not cursor operators, the individial queries are not allowed to have ORDER BY clauses.
- You can optionally add an ORDER BY clause that determines presentation ordering of the result of the set operator.
- The column names of result columns are determined by the first query.

**UNION**

The UNION set operator unifies the results of the two input queries.
As a set operator, UNION has an implied DINSTINCT property, meaning that it does not return duplicate rows.

**UNION ALL**

The UNION ALL operator unifies the result of the two input queries, but doesn't try to eliminate duplicates.

**INTERSECT**

The INTERSECT operator returns only distinct rows that are common to both sets.
If a row appears at least once in the first set and at least once in the second set, it will appear once in the result of the INTERSECT operator.

**EXPECT**

The EXPECT operator performs set difference. It returns distinct rows that appear in the first query but not the second. If a row appears at least once in the first query and zero times in the second, it's returned once in the output.

---

Set operators have precedence: INTERSECT precedes UNION and EXCEPT, and UNION and EXCEPT are considered equal.
You can always force precedence by using parentheses.